---
layout: default
title: Life is your canvas
description: Are there still mysteries within proteins?
---

# How does one know the artist and forget the artwork?

It doesn't take a lot to find someone who has heard about the DNA. This acronym has transcended its scientific importance to become sort of a futuristic buzzword. _"Let us run some DNA tests."_ _"It's in my DNA."_ _"Looks like sort of a DNA mutation."_ And who can blame us? It's arguably on all things alive, and it is known as the ultimate description of us. Just like a computer can do almost anything impressively fast with only ones and zeroes, the DNA can describe us almost completely with As, Ts, Cs and Gs. It is the ultimate promise to an impressive future with custom-made treatments to all ailments, unraveling all secrets lying behind the veil of life, and with every ounce of controversy, bend all rules governing life as we know it.

What is really compelling for me is how this fascination for DNA contrasts with the lack of public understanding of proteins. Well, proteins has also become kind of a buzzword, but for nutrition. _Proteins for breakfast._ _Proteins for dinner._ _Carbs are evil._ And so on. But what some people never realize is that proteins are the direct manifestation of that magical sequence of As, Ts, Cs and Gs we all love. Most people might imagine that some mushrooms may glow because of DNA, but the DNA can only make a mushroom glow through a well tailored protein.

We have a rather fancy wording for this phenomenon, we call it the **Central Dogma of Molecular Biology**. It's actually rather simple:

* DNA is able to self replicate;
* DNA is able to create RNA;
* RNA is responsible for protein synthesis.
   
Our focus is really on the last sentence, the final purpose of the DNA self replication and all its RNA transcription is to create protein. Just like some artists say that they live for their art, DNA exists to create their proteins. Proteins are able to do all things alive. Not only they have many structural purposes, but are involved in all chemical processes behind breathing, everyone's ability to think and perceive our surroundings, and all the shapes and forms we see people and living beings.

It is fairly easy to understand that people might not have such fascination for something they have for breakfast. But for me, to know DNA and not be fascinated with proteins and their wonders is like to love the artist but to disregard their art. 

Just as DNA may spell our existence with only four letters, proteins are able to act upon its wishes by using only 20 different types of amino acids. Tying together in a linear chain, just like a paper clip chain; and carefully rolled in a yarn ball-like manner. It is also important to keep in mind that many other molecules that aren't amino acids may take part on their composition, such as zinc, copper, and even bigger molecules, such as porphine. With this incredible variety of amino acid sequences, specific ways to be rolled on a ball, and special atoms or molecules to interact with incredible ways with mostly anything, the way proteins do their job is a mystery to behold, which is one of the many interests of a biochemist.

Some of those specifically chosen amino acids may hold some electric charge, which may repel or attract other charged molecules. These charges have two interesting functions:

* Attracting other amino acids in the same chain. This interaction may help to form the specific shape intended for the protein, and also to maintain its function as long as possible;
* The charges can induce interesting chemical reactions to happen, interacting with other molecules with its charges and breaking or forming chemical bonds which might have never happened without the protein;





Now, one can think of these chains of amino acids interacting within itself and others as an intricate puzzle, in which the charges attract each other like magnets, orchestrating the chemical reactions that in our eyes might seem like magic.

For instance, luciferase is a class of proteins whose purpose is to react with a substance called luciferin, emitting light as a result. This reaction imparts the glow we observe on fireflies, some snails, bacteria and fungi.

Another example of an impressive result of a well designed proteins are snake venoms. Although their composition has proven to be quite complex, there are many components of this lethal secretion which are actually proteins. For example, metalloproteinases are proteins able to unmake other proteins, digesting the prey from inside and disabling their own molecular machines, making for an easier catch for the slithering predator. Also, some proteins can disable other crucial mechanisms from prey just by binding with it and disabling its functions instead of breaking it apart. Cysteine-rich secretory proteins are also part of many snake venoms, and it is reported that they are able to disable some muscle contractions by binding with the receptors and blocking their stimuli, shutting down some of their bodily functions.

The thing about this whole matter is that we may know that the DNA is the origin of all the magic of life, but without understanding proteins we are clueless of how the magic itself happens. Biochemists around the world work everyday trying to unravel the complex machinery, paradoxically so small yet incredibly impactful. 

Will someday all those answers lie within our grasp? Maybe. Someday it will be your choice to help us understand those small everyday miracles.
